Introducing Identity for OpenSearch blog post (#1149)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2023-01-16-Introducing-Identity.markdown

# Introducing Identity for OpenSearch

OpenSearch's existing access control features included in the Security plugin let administrators apply access control to indexes and cluster actions so that users have the right permissions to do their work and the cluster is protected from unwanted activity. However, the features for access control that are currently in place do have certain limitations that can make it hard to use them with other plugins.

> As the core OpenSearch project begins its shift away from a plugin model to a framework that utilizes extensions, those extensions, its legacy plugins, and the administrators who manage them will need mechanisms for controlling access that are more granular and able to cover a broader range of scenarios where effective access control is critical. We are creating/building out/developing a new suite of features that are designed to provide comprehensive access control to OpenSearch’s ecosystem, and we collectively call these new features Identity. 

Reviewer: wdyt about linking to a blog post or this GH issue (https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/2447) on extensions here?

Author: I've added a link when I first mention extensions

> The main objectives for Identity include:

Reviewer: 🙌  I like this structure of listing high-level objects and diving into each one. These are my main takeaways when reading the post.

- Mechanisms for OpenSearch, plugins, and extensions that can check permissions before attempting an action.
- The ability to restrict plugins or extensions from performing actions unless they have been granted access.
- Functionality that allows background tasks to run with the same access controls as interactive user requests.
- The addition of new security boundaries inside OpenSearch that create conditions for a better defense-in-depth posture.

Let’s look at these objectives one by one.

### Enabling permissions checks 

> With any Using OpenSearch Dashboards your permissions you can start editing a Dashboard,and after hitting 'Save' seeing an error message "Dashboard ... was not saved. Error: Forbidden".  This scenario exists because Dashboards can not check if these commands are allowed or denied.

Reviewer: This is a good example of the limitation of the current security model, but I think it needs to be reframed. 

Does it make sense to present an analogy here? In the current system there is no way to ask the question "Does this user have permission to perform this action?", instead what happens is that the user tries to perform and action and is blocked after initiating an action. In this case it leads to less-than-desirable UX because UI actions cannot be disabled when its known that a user does not have high enough privileges.

Author: Restructured, let me know what you think

There is a blind spot for OpenSearch Administrators where after they make a change to permissions of a user or group it is unclear if those were applied as expected.

> Identity will add APIs that Dashboards, plugins, and extensions can use to check.  Administrators will be able to make requests to these same APIs to check permissions.

Author: Reworked this, let me know if this flows better to you.

### Plugins and Extensions restrictions

> Feeling confidant installating apps on mobile phone is in part because there are limits on what apps can do.  OpenSearch's plugins have had few limits making them risky for Administrators to install.

Reviewer: Also `installing`.

This is a great analogy and I am wondering if we should mention anything about OpenSearch being a platform. When moving to the new paradigm of extensions, cluster administrators need new tools to limit how extensions can interact with an OpenSearch cluster similar to how smartphone users can limit apps downloaded from an App Store.

> Feeling confidant installating apps on mobile phone is in part because there are limits on what apps can do.  OpenSearch's plugins have had few limits making them risky for Administrators to install.

Author: Fixed `installating`

> Feeling confidant installating apps on mobile phone is in part because there are limits on what apps can do.  OpenSearch's plugins have had few limits making them risky for Administrators to install.

Author: > OpenSearch being a platform

Good callout, not sure how to fit this in there, did you have a notation how to make this a more concrete callout?

> Feeling confident installing apps on mobile phone is in part because there are limits on what apps can do. OpenSearch's plugins have had few limits making them risky for Administrators to install.

Author: You are a wordsmith of amazing caliber!

By associating the plugin/extension activities with permissions checks on OpenSearch, we can ensure that limits are enforced.  These permissions will be the same as those used to grant users access - reducing the complexity and risk for Administrators.

### Background tasks permissions

> Many tasks run in the background of an OpenSearch cluster such as deleting old indices, producing monitoring data, and generating reports. When these different tasks execute, each should only have minimal set of permissions it needs to protect against mistakes or unintended consequences.

Author: Nicely done, I've trimmed off that last section about alerts, if someone build a log of success/failed tasks would be really cool :D

### Security Isolation 

> Using the lowest level of privileges when any task is executed is a key to prevent mistakes or software defects from impacting the stability of an OpenSearch cluster. By enforcing protections everywhere inside OpenSearch, the blast radius of these incidents will be drastically reduced.

Reviewer 2: I was just looking over something that DC had commented on in another PR regarding the principle of least privilege. Is that the idea here? If yes, I suppose this should be reworded to "Using a minimal set of privileges to allow users to run tasks is key ...". If it's important to emphasize this idea, I could revise this to place a sharper point on the concept and make clear that it's a driver behind this objective.

> Using the lowest level of privileges when any task is executed is a key to prevent mistakes or software defects from impacting the stability of an OpenSearch cluster. By enforcing protections everywhere inside OpenSearch, the blast radius of these incidents will be drastically reduced.

Author: > I was just looking over something that DC had commented on in another PR regarding the principle of least privilege. Is that the idea here? If yes, [...]

Yes this is the case.  On the topic of who is creating these permissions, they will be managed internally by the OpenSearch team, so while administrators/users of a cluster will benefit, the only action they need to take is using the latest version.

> Using the lowest level of privileges when any task is executed is a key to prevent mistakes or software defects from impacting the stability of an OpenSearch cluster. By enforcing protections everywhere inside OpenSearch, the blast radius of these incidents will be drastically reduced.

Reviewer 2: Hold on, that's big ([permissions will be] managed internally by the OpenSearch team, so while administrators/users of a cluster will benefit, the only action they need to take is using the latest version). 
Are you adding that? At least, "the only action users need to take is to keep versions up to date.)

## Interested in being involved?

> These are bold changes and they are going to require doing things differently that has been done. We are in the process of defining and building the Identity systems into the core of open search. 

Reviewer: nit: Use `OpenSearch` consistently throughout.

> This is a paradigm shift, security features will be easier for OpenSearch developers to access and rely on. We are in the process of defining and building the Identity systems into the core of OpenSearch. 

Author: > Q: Do you want to provide some instruction for ways to join the community meetings?

Good call, I'll add a link

> This is a paradigm shift, security features will be easier for OpenSearch developers to access and rely on. We are in the process of defining and building the Identity systems into the core of OpenSearch. 

Author: > Terms in this blog ...

Love this.  It looks like GitHub supports footnotes[^1], let me know what you think.

[^1]: https://github.blog/changelog/2021-09-30-footnotes-now-supported-in-markdown-fields/

> This is a paradigm shift, security features will be easier for OpenSearch developers to access and rely on. We are in the process of defining and building the Identity systems into the core of OpenSearch. 

Reviewer 2: That is pretty slick!

As Identity impacts many facets of the OpenSearch ecosystem we would like your ideas and contributions to be engaged during the development process [link](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/4514) and watch this [feature branch](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pulls?q=is%3Apr+base%3Afeature%2Fidentity) or [label](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues?q=label%3AIdentity+) in OpenSearch.

> Expect more blog posts on Identity features and presentations during the community meetings.

Reviewer 3: `More updates to follow during community meetings.` Thoughts?

> # Introducing Identity for OpenSearch

Author: Being that the total scope of this space is intentionally in flux shifting away from a product name such as "Identity" and instead referring to these components as 'identity and access controls'.  Thanks for calling this out!

OpenSearch's[^1] existing access control features included in the Security plugin let administrators apply access control to indexes and cluster actions so that users have the right permissions[^2] to do their work and the cluster is protected from unwanted activity. However, the features for access control that are currently in place do have certain limitations that can make it hard to use them with other plugins.

As the core OpenSearch Project begins its shift away from a plugin[^3] model to a platform that utilizes extensions[^4], those extensions, its legacy plugins, and the administrators who manage them will need mechanisms for controlling access that are more granular and able to cover a broader range of scenarios where effective access control is critical. We are developing a new suite of features that are designed to provide comprehensive access control to OpenSearch’s ecosystem, and we collectively call these new features "Identity". 

Identity’s main objectives aim to:

> - Provide mechanisms for OpenSearch, plugins, and extensions that can check permissions before attempting an action.

Author: Rewrote as "Provide mechanisms for checking permissions in OpenSearch and in OpenSearch plugins and extensions before attempting an action." - OpenSearch internal components have never been able to conduct these checks so they are part of the equation too in my mind.

To ensure that these kinds of limitations are enforced, we plan to leverage the same structures used to grant users access and map permissions to all activities around managing plugins and extensions. As a result, we will reduce the complexity and risk for administrators who are responsible for managing these tasks.

### Background task permissions

There are many tasks that run in the background of an OpenSearch cluster, such as deletion of old indexes and generation of monitoring data and reports. When these tasks execute, each should have only the minimum number of permissions needed to protect against task errors and any unintended results and their consequences.

Identity will ensure that permissions applied to these tasks are well defined and effective at preventing errors from happening or administrators seeing unexpected results.

### Security isolation 

> Following the principle of least privilege, using a minimum number of permissions to run tasks is key to preventing execution errors or software flaws from having an impact on the stability of an OpenSearch cluster. Identity will launch features that can protect all of the separate elements in OpenSearch by isolating the potential impact a problem with one part may exert on another. As a consequence, this will reduce the reach of errors and keep them from affecting other areas of OpenSearch.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Following the principle of least privilege, using a minimum number of permissions to run tasks is key to preventing execution errors or software flaws from impacting the stability of an OpenSearch cluster. Identity will launch features that can protect all of the separate elements in OpenSearch by isolating the potential impact a problem in one element may have on another element. This will reduce the spread of errors and keep them from affecting other areas of OpenSearch.
```

## Get involved

> "Identity presents a significant departure from the current security model. It does so to provide features that make it easier for OpenSearch developers to access and build assets and for administrators to carry out tasks in a stable environment. Over the last several months we’ve been busy defining new features and building out the tools to prepare for the integration of Security into core OpenSearch. We’ve struck out on this path in an effort to make security features for OpenSearch more efficient, more reliable, and simply easier and more enjoyable to work with.

Reviewer 4: "integration of the Security plugin into core OpenSearch"?

> And since we operate in the open source community, we’d like to learn about your ideas and benefit from your contributions as we make progress and move development along.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
And since we operate in the open-source community, we’d like to learn about your ideas and benefit from your contributions as we make progress.
```

Reviewer 4: How would we like to learn about their ideas and benefit from their contributions? What do we want them to do?

> Keep an eye out for further blog posts on specific features for Identity, and join us for presentations during the community meetings. Furthermore, you can stay on top of development by visiting the following resources in the OpenSearch repository:

Reviewer 4: Should we include a link relevant to community meetings?

- [OpenSearch meetup group events](https://www.meetup.com/opensearch/events/)
- [Support for native authentication and authorization in OpenSearch](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/4514)
- [Feature branch for Identity](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pulls?q=is%3Apr+base%3Afeature%2Fidentity)
- [Current issues for Identity](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues?q=label%3AIdentity+)

> We look forward to your participation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We look forward to your participation!
```

#### Terms in this blog

[^1]: OpenSearch — a community-driven and open source (Apache 2.0 licensed) search engine.

> [^2]: Permissions — rights and privileges granted to a user that allow the user to perform specified tasks within a software application or platform. Permissions are typically managed by administrators responsible for overseeing who gets access to different parts of the platform.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[^2]: Permissions – Rights and privileges granted to a user that allow the user to perform specified tasks within a software application or platform. Permissions are typically managed by administrators responsible for overseeing who can access different parts of the platform.
```

[^3]: Plugin — a small piece of software designed to customize a larger software application. Plugins do not modify the core functionality of the larger application, they only add to the core functionality.

> [^4]: Extension — a software program designed to enhance and extend functionality of a larger software application. Extensions do involve some integration with the core of the larger application to meet the aims of the extra functionality it introduces.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[^4]: Extension – A software program designed to enhance and extend the functionality of a larger software application. Extensions involve some integration with the core of the larger application to meet the aims of the extra functionality they introduce.
```
